---
title: Goodness and happiness in Central Asia
excerpt: Short stories from a trip in Gorno-Badakhshan, from Dushanbe (Tajikistan) to Osh (Kyrghistan), biking through the Bartang Valley and up the Kyzyl-Art pass
tags: travel
lang: en
ref: pamir

---

{% include youtube.html id="mJ3bzb2LX40" %}

# The story


## Arrival in Dushanbe

The impact at the airport is very strong. Accustomed, in the West, to luminous screens which, after landing, direct the traveller to the baggage claim area and guide him to the exit as efficiently as possible, we find ourselves walking almost on the runway towards a low building which is definitely overcrowded with shouting people who seem to argue about every box and package. They "seem" to, as in reality everything works perfectly.

I am the one who does not understand, looking at the crowd with the expectation that only an organisational machine made up of planning, tapes and illuminated signs can guarantee efficiency in handling the connections between luggage and people, when in reality all that is needed is the desire to solve problems. Like when, after a good half-hour's wait, the staff let me get on the belt and go through the hole where luggage usually comes out, not people in, to check directly on the trolley coming from the plane that no, two big boxes containing two bicycles were not on that flight.

In the West, same problem but different approach: look for an appropriate desk, fill in a request, smile and wait. In Dushanbe, they literally throw you in the field to solve the problem yourself. Although unfortunatly (at the moment I think "unfortunatly") the luggage is stopped in Moscow for unknown reasons (not true, we know very well that we did not pay the Moscow-Dushanbe route, but we want to ignore it). And it wouldn't have arrived before two days, just enough time for me to get to know a great Central Asian city and the people who live there.


## Where and why

The decision between Flavio and me to embark on a cycling trip together was born in January 2014, after we had known each other for a few months, shared some trail running races and ski mountaineering trips; there was no precise destination yet, just the desire to share a travel experience with only two basic rules: two-wheeled means of transport and breathtaking nature.

We gathered information about Tibet, but we were intimidated by the organisation of the trip in a country with complicated politics and bureaucracy: our only limit was time, three weeks, and we couldn't afford days stuck in the city waiting for visas, or uncertain connections with the risk of considerably shortening the experience and converting precious time into red tape.

The Karakorum also came up in the proposals, but even that area is not easy for us Westerners. In particular, the main wildlife attractions are in Kashmir, and the area is ranked high on the list of terrorist risk countries for westerners. It would also be our first experience in the Asian region, and we preferred a relatively quiet and democratic country.

After seeing pictures of the landscapes of the Pamir plateau, and some videos of the Bartang valley in particular, the decision was made. All the ingredients were there: relatively safe departure and arrival airports, security, and breathtaking nature.

We found a lot of information about the Pamir Highway, but relatively little about the Bartang valley, and armed with a spirit of adventure we sketched out a route with departure in Dushanbe, transfer by taxi for the first 300 kilometres as they were flat and uninteresting in terms of landscape, another 150 kilometres or so along the Panj river which divides Tajikistan from Afghanistan, deviation from the main road and 150 kilometres along the Bartang river, in the valley of the same name, to then come out again on the Pamir Highway and cover another 300 kilometres entering Kyrghistan and ending the journey in Osh.

Since I was more fluent in English, I took care of all the bureaucracy, making contacts with a local agency for the various permits and looking for air connections, while Flavio armed himself with a lot of patience and created almost manually with pencil and ruler the GPS track to follow, following the rivers on Google Earth to verify that there was at least one track where we intended to pass and to have daily targets of distance to cover.

We tried to coincide our overnight stops with more or less big villages, in order to ensure supplies, but then we discovered that we had been a bit naive and optimistic about the availability of shops along the road: along the Bartang valley, since trade is very limited, people live on what they raise and cultivate, and are limited to the purchase of raw materials such as sugar and flour. Shops do not exist, or rather, there is a person in the village who regularly delivers these goods and shops them in a "Magazin", which is close to what we might consider a shop, but has no opening hours: you simply have to look for someone with the keys, and ask him to open it.

Same with petrol: we needed it for the camp cooker, but there are not many cars along the valley, and it is usually shared by the whole village. Asking around in the various villages, we finally found one where a person had a few jerry cans, and we were sold a litre.

We thought we would at least buy bread, but even that is made at home by each family in a small bakery at the well in sufficient quantities for self-sustenance; there is no trade in it.


## Dushanbe

The capital is a big city, chaotic but multicoloured, noisy but with quiet corners, torrid but with pleasant oases of coolness and relaxation.

On arrival, having ascertained that it would not be possible to have any bicycles, nor even to communicate properly with the airline, we head for the hotel we had chosen before leaving, the Vaksh. Built in 1942 as a Soviet military hospital, it seems never to have been properly renovated: the structure is quite dilapidated, with crumbling plasterwork and decidedly inadequate plumbing. The room assigned to us is still to be cleaned, and contains the remnants of the previous occupants' lunch. We change and leave immediately to deal with the bicycle issue.

Our only local contact is Shagarf, from the Pamir Silk Travel agency, and we head to him for support. He is a great help to us with the Utair employees and the airport workers themselves in filling out the complaint and making contact with the Moscow airport office. We then have breakfast together in the market, with some excellent eggs and the ubiquitous bread, yoghurt and tea.

To get around, we use the extensive network of minibuses that travel mainly on the main artery and also connect the various main destinations in the city. All you have to do is look out into the street and wave to the first passing minibus with the number of the desired route, in our case centre-airport number 8, and by having the driver send two Somoni you can quickly reach your destination. You have to raise your voice a bit to get the minibus to stop, both before getting on and once on the road.

The airport, although not built recently, is functional and well-kept, but a new wing was under construction and seems to have been inaugurated a few weeks after our arrival.

In the airport forecourt we have an excellent breakfast of eggs, tea, yoghurt and bread, and we notice the various groups of westerners who are preparing to load their jeeps for the various treks and on-the-road trips on the Pamir Highway. A driver briefly entertains us with his tales of Marco Polo's sheep hunts (*Ovis ammon polii*) and tries to convince us to give up the bikes and follow him, for a fee, to the most profitable hunting spots in the country, but we politely refuse, wave and ignore.


## History

I made, and paid for, the serious mistake of not having done my homework before the trip: a little more preliminary research on the history of the country would have been useful to better understand the few conversations with the locals.

In Tajikistan, and in particular in the autonomous region of Gorno-Badakhshan, one can encounter various cultures derived from the different empires and colonisers that have ruled the region throughout history; in particular, the Soviet Union has left a deep mark both in terms of innovation and infrastructure, and the sudden collapse and consequent vacuum of both government and economy. Roads and power lines no longer maintained, goods typically derived from a planned economy (only two types of biscuits, one colour and two colours) and the spread of the Russian language, even in the most rural areas, can be seen everywhere.

Talking to locals, especially those living in remote areas, one gets the feeling that they miss the "good old days": medicines arrived, roads were maintained, there was a railway network, and there was even a helicopter for medical emergencies. Now, however, especially in winter, some villages in the Bartang valley remain completely isolated in the event of snowfall, landslides and mudslides resulting from heavy rain, or simply a lack of petrol for vehicles.

Talking to people, we get the impression that, when the Soviets were in power, the Tajiks considered themselves part of a "great people", and should have the same rights as the Russians in the motherland, thus with infrastructure and social structures; the military presence could justify the roads and bridges on the border with Afghanistan, but in the Bartang valley there seemed to be no strategic objective: nevertheless, electricity worked and medicines arrived.

Now, however, with a central government in Dushanbe, the part of the country that actively contributes to the economy (through taxes) is being deprived of this privilege, and the GBAO region, which makes up 50 percent of the land area but only 3 percent of the population, has little to offer and is left to its own devices; without a network of roads it is not possible to set up businesses or development projects, and families send their young people to study in the cities. Even tourism, which would represent a considerable potential, is not destined to grow without connections or accommodation facilities capable of absorbing the growing demand.

Especially in the villages along the Panj river, on the border with Afghanistan, there is a strong presence of "Islamic cultural centres" that also offer medical assistance, schools and social gathering places. In the absence of a central State, religious institutions probably have more space and resources to involve the population by offering them services that in other regions are the prerogative of State institutions.


## Locals leaving us honey

We have now finished setting up our first camp a few kilometres from [Kalaykhusayn](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Kalaykhusayn,+Tajikistan/@38.718825,70.6497287,15z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x38b83d0a515fec57:0x3473f43a8cb6b22c?hl=en), when a Hyundai Galloper, now several years old, pulls up on the road and a young man of our age comes towards us, gesticulating and smiling.

At first we feared that we had set up camp on his property, and would be forced to pick up everything and move, but we soon realise that he is simply honoured to see foreign tourists just outside his village. He blurts out 'the place where he was born and raised' and where 'his family has always lived' (the quote is the best I could translate from his schoolboyish but precise English and enthusiasm for communicating the places he loves).

More people get out of the truck, seven in all, while two older women remain in the car. He tells us that they are all members of his family, and are returning home after a day's work producing honey. At one point he seems particularly interested in one of our pots. Intrigued, we hand it to him and he, murmuring a few words, passes it to another boy who starts running towards the car. We try to explain that we come from Italy and that our destination is Osh, in Kyrghistan, but it seems clear that for him his whole world is the river and the mountains around here. The boy returns with the pot: to show us their hospitality, they give us a whole honeycomb dripping with honey, which, placed in bags and bottles, will last us for several days as a breakfast supplement and as a sweet complement to the biscuits.

We thank them and say goodbye, admiring the pride with which these people welcome us to the places they love and the generosity with which they share the products of their work and their land.


## Girls returning to villages to work

Arriving near Yapshorv, we set up camp and decide to explore the village on foot. We arrive at the creek, when a UAZ comes roaring down from the roads upstream, approaches the creek, slows down, then accelerates again and literally jumps and drives into the creek, the bottom of which is composed of unstable rocks the size of melons. Probably any other off-road vehicle could have crossed at that point with as much ease, but I think at half the speed of the indestructible Soviet van.

We take a path up through some fields, and several girls are cutting the grass with small sickles. One of them looks at us and says, "Hello, where are you from?" She speaks good English and tells us that she studies in the city during the year and returns to the village in the summer to help her family in the fields. He takes us for a walk through the streets of the small village, made up of low houses whose roofs are covered with apricots dried in the sun. There are no details that identify one profession over another, such as a blacksmith or a carpenter: they all seem to work in the fields and own animals, working with what nature gives them and building their own houses using simple but durable techniques.

We pass by a group of curious boys, but our guide does not stop: we recognise some of them who were on board the UAZ that forded the torrent, they all seem very young and eager to communicate, but they probably see us talking to the girl from town in a language they do not know. We learn that generally the male boys take care of the animals, while the work in the fields is left to the girls, but we don't understand if this is a peculiarity of this village or the custom of this valley.

We learn that, at the birth of each child, the father plants eight trees just outside the village. When the boy reaches adulthood, they will be enough to form the basis of his new home. They will provide the supporting structure, while the walls will be made of bricks of baked earth and clay, which is abundant near the river.

We say goodbye to the girl and return to the camp, now almost at sunset. We pay for the bad decision of having chosen an area close to a small mosquito-infested pond. We take clean water from the stream and wash it all in the sandy waters of the river.


## The village head girl

Often it is only after many years of sacrifice and the prospect of many more in the future that a person decides to buy a house, and it is with no small amount of pride that he then welcomes guests with the phrase "Welcome to my home". The adjective 'mine' means that with hard work they have earned the right of ownership, they own it, they do (almost) what they want with it, and they can boast about it. It is probably due to the difference in cultures, ages, and especially languages, but when the little girl welcomed us with open arms and a big smile and the phrase "Welcome to my village!" we looked at each other and said "He looks like a chief."

The road being narrow between the mountain on one side and the river on the other, we decided to leave it for the village of [Voznavd](https://www.google.com/maps/place/37%C2%B057'36.0%22N+71%C2%B016'33.5%22E/@37.96,71.2737835,722m/data=!3m2!1e3!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x0:0x0!8m2!3d37.96!4d71.2759722?hl=en), accessible, according to the map, by a steep road on the left. After a few hundred metres we come out in the square of a quiet village of a few dozen houses. We find a fountain and a bench in the shade, and decide to settle down for lunch.

We do not have time to pull out the cooker when a boy, I think about 14 years old, and a little girl, a few years younger, appear in front of us. The girl introduces herself: "Hello. Welcome to my village". She says this in a way that seems to indicate that she owns the village, but we understand that enthusiasm can lead to misinterpretation and we conclude that she simply means that she welcomes us to the village where she lives.

He leads us through the houses, and welcomes us into his garden, where several members of his family and a teacher, so he tells us, are having lunch. We refuse their food but prepare our own portions under the curious eyes of the diners. The boy then shows us his writings and photographs, and we do the same with our postcards from home. They are both studying music in the city, and are in the village for the summer break.

When lunch is over, the girl notices us approaching the stream to wash our dishes, and with an air of superiority she takes them from our hands and polishes them with an appropriate pad and detergent. What a guy! After playing with a chick for a while, we say goodbye and get back on the road. I will later regret not having taken a single photo of the friendly family and the owner of the village of Voznavd!


## The shepherds' tent

We continue along the river, and the beauty around us is breathtaking: colourful low mountains near us, higher mountains covered with glaciers in the distance, sunshine and vastness. But it is one o'clock, and we are in the hours of the day when we had planned to prefer a long rest in the shade, and we immediately accept the invitation of two shepherds to enter their tent set up on a slope.

The tent is about five metres in diameter, made of thick PVC, and has a blue UNHCR logo on the outside. We enter, and there are two other men, one of them lying down, snoring noisily, and the other using him as a bench. In the middle, bread and yoghurt. The two who invited us take their places, after having brought the inevitable thermos of tea with goat's milk and salt, biscuits, two varieties of fresh butter and some fermented milk. They ask us by gesture if we have seen any animals along the track, and at what height. It seems that some have wandered off, and men were on their trail, but we do not understand if other shepherds further down the valley were competing, or what other story lay behind these questions, and we put our hearts on the fact that we cannot understand.

The butter is phenomenal, surprisingly fresh considering the blazing sun outside and the absence of refrigerators: they probably have a cave where they can store refrigerated products. The bread is fresh, but as soon as we taste the fermented milk, an electric shock goes through us: it is really strong and acidic, and we think that if we are still healthy in the evening, we won't be afraid of anything anymore. They ask us for cigarettes, but we don't have any. A lesson for next time: comfort goods are always welcome.

One of them wants to communicate, but English is absent; so I pull out my Russian-Italian dictionary, and he snatches it from my hands. He flips through it and points to the page 'Useful phrases for taking the car to the mechanic'. What does that mean? After a few gestures, we realise that he wants to tell us his job, but not that of a mechanic. He mentions the word "motor oil", which in Russian we notice is translated in the same way as vegetable oil, butter and fat: they are shepherds and live off what they milk from the animals, but being away from the village for the whole summer, during which they take the animals to the high pastures, they have to convert the milk into products that can be stored: butter to be consumed on the spot, and cheese to take home. But all this is not in the dictionary, we deduce it from "motor oil" and using no small amount of gestures. Meanwhile, the man-bench is still asleep.

At a certain point, the man gestures us to sleep. He asks us if we want to sleep. We say no. Then he gestures to us that they would like to sleep. OK, we think. But we didn't understand that he wanted to sleep immediately, and he gestures that either we sleep too, or we pick up our things and leave. Their day is long, and their snack has already lasted long enough. We offer to leave some money to pay for the hospitality, but they make it clear that they don't want it, and that where they are, money doesn't count for anything.


## The yurt with the mother cooking the whole sheep

After a few hours exposed to the cold winds of the plains, we were looking forward to a break. Two children come to meet us and intercept us at the end of a climb, and insist on having us with them for tea. The yurt is a hard temptation to give up, and we accept.

We enter the tent, and the whole family is busy with household chores: the mother loads the stove on which a huge pot full of water is boiling; the youngest child immediately starts cradling a basket containing a baby; a girl is tidying up other pots and dishes, and the oldest child is preparing sugar and cookies. The father is not there, probably at work, so he wants to be the man of the house, and he succeeds very well even though he is no more than ten years old. He offers us tea, cookies and sugar, and above all the real first fruits, fresh butter, excellent if spread on bread or cookies.

He also gives us a handful of what look like stones but turn out to be balls of salty, stone-hard cheese, to be eaten by crushing small pieces with the teeth or stones, as they cannot be melted with water or heat. Good, but really hard. We understand that the texture and salting makes it suitable to be kept in your pocket during long days of work in the pasture or away from home, when you cannot afford the luxury of lunch at home with fresh cheese.

As we enjoy our tea and chat with the girl, on vacation from school in the city, her mother carries on with her lunch preparation and uncovers from a cloth a half sheep completely skinned but still with all the limbs in place, and plunges it into the pot amidst puffs of steam and splashes of boiling water. "We're making lunch, do you want to stop?" He will probably disassemble it only later in the cooking process and inside the pot, so as not to lose precious flavors in performing the operation on a table.

We decline the invitation and get back on the road, thanking for the hospitality and the temporary shelter from the wind that today does not seem to calm down. We take a few pictures and convince the mother to pose with us. "I don't want to, I'm too old," the girl tells us, although to us she honestly looks our age, only with features more tempered by manual labor and country life.

The children don't really want us to leave, and they chase us. The ground is grassy, and we can't keep them apart. The youngest literally threw himself on my back wheel, and I don't know how he got his arm stuck between the wheel and the frame. With horror I free him, and fortunately he was not hurt: a heavy jacket limited the damage to a big scare, both mine and his, but as soon as I made sure that there were no consequences I take advantage of the loss to speed up, say goodbye and go.


## The water

In the first days of the trip, in one of the small villages along the river that, developed around large trees, offer a pleasant resting (and trading) area for truckers in transit, stopping for a break at the fountain we had the pleasure to take some pictures with crew and passengers of an off-road vehicle heading to Khorog. The drivers were eager to have a word with us, perhaps the travelers a little less so, presumably wanting to get to their destination as soon as possible. We loaded our canteens, refreshed ourselves with spring water, and off we went again.

I can say that I discovered fresh water. Before leaving Italy, when asked "What is your favorite drink?" I would have probably answered a good coffee, a well-made cocktail, or a particularly flavorful tea. But on this trip, I never wanted anything more than spring water. The most pleasant stops were all characterized by the presence of a spring with which to rinse, prepare drinks, sometimes clean equipment or wash clothes, but most of all refresh ourselves.

One of the most memorable encounters was before Razoudj, where we met two brothers who were resting in the shade of a large tree during the middle hours of the day. One was a shepherd, pointing out his goats to us up the mountain; the other was fixing the trail armed with a pickaxe and shovel. We took advantage of the spring to wash and refill our water supplies and decided to stay with them for a while. They were enthusiastic about the meeting, and shared some bread and prepared a tea, or rather, a pot of tea all for us. The pastor, the younger of the two, spoke a little English, and was very curious about where we were coming from and what our plans were. We took a few pictures and set off again, our stomachs full and smiles on our faces at having met such kind and friendly people.


## Fellow travelers we met on the road: Sebastian, Paul, Andy

During our two weeks of cycling, we often shared some miles, in some cases quite a few, with different fellow travelers from all corners of the globe.

Andy and Patrick started their journey in Georgia, crossed the Caspian Sea on the infamous Baku ferry that requires a great deal of patience, cycled through Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, arrived in Tajikistan and met on the descent from the highest pass of the Pamir Highway, about 4,600 meters. The previous night had been one of the few they had spent in a tent, given their preference to stay in the "homestays" and get to know the inhabitants of the villages they passed through, and they had a cold memory of it, so to speak, as the altitude was very high and the equipment, though excellent, not very comfortable. Very nice and full of energy, they were headed to Sari Tash, then to the border with China, then Kashgar and then who knows. We shared with them the night in Karakul, the hard stage up to Sari Tash and the lovely Hotel Tatina, and then we parted.

Andy spoke a few words of Russian, and it was pleasant how he could carry on long speeches even with a limited vocabulary; unforgettable was his handling of the controls at the customs lost in the mountains entering Kyrghistan, in Russian but accompanied by gestures and sounds:

"Good morning.

"Good morning."

"This is the customs, I need to ask you some questions".

"Okay."

"What do you have in your bags?" (pointing to Andy's large bags, 45kg of material)

"Clothes."

"Fine"

"Tent"

"Okay. Do you have any firearms?" (with gun gesture)

"No" (surprised)

"Bombs?"

"No!" (laughing slightly)

"Drugs? Narcotics?"

"No!" (with an expression of contempt)

"Really? No heroin? Opium?"

"No!!!"

"Good. Off you go and have a safe trip."

Smooth as silk, and a relaxed welcome to a country that would prove to be hospitable and colorful.

Sebastian, on the other hand, had started from his home in Germany and pedaled through Eastern Europe and then rode the same stretch as Andy and Patrick from Georgia to the Pamir Highway. We met him on the road to Karakul as well, but he preferred to camp in nature instead, using villages only for supplies. Different choice of travel, certainly no less exciting, though the five inches of snow we saw blanketing his tent outside of Sary Tash, at about 3500 feet elevation, certainly made for a night to remember. Heading into Vietnam, we shared the Kyzyl-Art pass and several photos with him as well, and then split up, we to Osh and he to Vietnam.

We also met a couple of very young Swiss from Ticino who were traveling in the opposite direction, from Sari Tash to Tajikistan, with bicycles bought in China and very rough equipment, but with energy and determination to spare. They aimed to cross the pass the night it snowed, we think they took refuge in the only farm between the two customs, as the mud would have made their ascent impossible.

All the other encounters lasted no more than a few minutes, a few chats and exchanges of information about the roads: everyone had their journey in mind, a destination, a route, a timeline, even if approximate. There were no people lost in their own thoughts, or looking for something they couldn't define: they were all real, square cyclists, and from all of them we learned valuable advice to face the rest of the route or those that would come in the future.

One biker stood out: a native of Genoa, he spends all year running his Gite d'Etap in the Pyrenees, and for the past few years has kept a motorcycle parked in Osh to tour Central Asia without a fixed destination. He speaks a good Farsi, which allows him to communicate fluently with the locals using a language much more familiar than Russian or English: what envy, to be able to show that the desire to integrate is such that he has learned a language so far from ours! He knows the right places in Osh where to have a good breakfast, and the switches in the Alai hotel to have hot water in the showers, as the custom is the cold shower. He also traveled through the Bartang valley, and we believe it was not easy to cross the fords that we encountered, and as an old fox of the areas he always keeps a good supply of gasoline in the tanks as he knows that the same is a rare and precious commodity in those remote areas. 

We would meet several times on the road from Karakul to Osh, often going in different directions and unexpectedly meeting again, and we would leave each other that he would have an appointment for a climb of Piz Lenin, and then return to Europe on a Polish truck bound for Warsaw, which would have saved him quite a few permits to cross Kazakhstan or Russia on his motorcycle.


## Error loading the GPS tracks

The day seemed never-ending: we had been pedaling for almost a hundred kilometers now and the bridge over the Vanch River was approaching. A few hundred meters before, an endless column of trucks parked on the sides of the road announced a delay. We arrived a few dozen meters from the bridge, and groups of people were idling and standing in front of a small white building: we got off our bikes and entered the checkpoint.

Two soldiers ask us for our passports and, more importantly, our GBAO permits; to register our nationality, they ask us to indicate our flag on an old World Cup calendar; they manually write down, with an enviable calligraphy, all the details in a very neat register, and they wave us on. Flavio, who left a few minutes before me, has attracted quite a crowd around the bicycle, curious about this strange means of transport full of bags and packages. But even more intrigued by the strange shape of his beard: he has a long goatee under his chin, and the drivers can't classify him according to the classical schemes of the religions known to them. They ask us if we are Muslims, given the beard, but at the same time they are surprised by the unconventional shape of it; we tell them that we were raised Christians, and the beard has no particular importance, especially for our generations, and for them this is very funny.

After a lot of mutual laughter, we walk away towards the bridge, which we discover is completely closed to heavy traffic: a team of welders is repairing the bottom with large iron panels, and there is only room for one car to pass. We ask permission and, curious, they let us through without any problem.

On the other side of the river, we pass by another column of TIRs; as in every European lay-by, each driver has taken out his table and kitchen and is preparing dinner. We notice several Chinese features, which in this region are particularly distinguished from Tajiks, unlike what we will encounter in Kyrghistan. We climb two hairpin bends, and the column continues for hundreds of meters more. We can clearly see that the flow of goods is predominantly east-west: the trucks are much more numerous on this side. Now we are really tired, but the area is desert and we need to get closer to the river to wash and cook.

We discover a small track that goes back in the direction of the river but away from the bridge: we go in for a few hundred meters, and at the end we find a [house](https://www.google.com/maps/place/38%C2%B017'48. 5%22N+71%C2%B020'23.5%22E/@38.2968809,71.3392137,254m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x0:0x0!8m2!3d38.2968056!4d71.3398611?hl=en): some women insist on stopping to eat, and an old man makes us understand that we can also stay for the night. His son, the head of the family tells us, is a policeman in Vanch, and will arrive shortly for dinner. We settle down in a platform covered with blankets and are offered tea, bread and yogurt.

We try to communicate with the old man, but without much success. He doesn't speak a word of English, and we try Russian, but our vocabulary is pitiful. It looks like a very large family, but we don't understand the degrees of kinship. There are three women, all intent on washing dishes, looking after the animals and preparing, we think, dinner.

We sort through our equipment and maps and realize that we are traveling too much. 100, 120 kilometers a day, a bit much compared to the plan. We both own GPS devices that are a bit outdated, and for navigation we mainly use my Garmin eTrex Vista, since I have the possibility to load maps, even though the graphics are not very detailed. But unfortunately it has the limitation of accepting only tracks composed of maximum 500 points, and therefore needs some editing from the raw track of Google Earth. Flavio has developed several versions of the track for different routes that we have evaluated, and we realized only now that I have uploaded a more "pushed" version, with many more daily kilometers per stage. It is true, we find ourselves in a slight "surplus" compared to the plans, but also slightly tired. We tidy up the tracks, as much as it is possible to work on them without a PC, and in the meantime dinner is ready.

The head of the family is very talkative, but unfortunately not in a language we understand. We can only understand that he is a "policeman", which could be translated as traffic warden as well as investigator or secret agent, but what counts for us is that he is very hospitable in offering us an excellent dinner with vegetables, bread, sauces and yogurt. After a short time, the women and children enter the house but the old man doesn't mention going to bed, even though he has ascertained that it is almost impossible to communicate: we think we understand that he has to wait until the women have finished tidying up before he can enter the house. Our shelter for the night is the same platform we used for dinner: we cover it with blankets and settle down under a magnificent starry sky.

The next morning, as soon as we woke up, the old man was with us, almost as if he wanted to keep us company; we got ready and soon left the hospitality of this family, and we didn't know how to repay; we insisted with the old man that we leave some money, and he proposed a generic 100 somoni, a derisory sum for us. We bid farewell and got back on track.


## The donated bicycle

By now it had made its history. It had been the first bicycle I had purchased, and with which I had spent my first adventures and my first trip to Sardinia. It had many kilometers under its wheels, and at home it had already left the baton to a much more modern model.

I don't care much for objects, I consider them as tools that should be used to exhaustion and replaced once they have finished their work, or once the value they bring doesn't reflect what they ask for. This is the case of this bike, the cost of transporting it home does not even come close to the actual value it would have once returned. And I think: if it has no value to me anymore, could it have any value to others?

We are having trouble organizing the return trip: the bikes need to be packed solidly to withstand the various airplane transfers, and we can't find the right material; we have toured the bazaar far and wide, and every piece of cardboard is used for every possible purpose before being considered unusable, and finding something to cover an entire bike seems like a tough task. We take a different route.

In the same hotel where we are staying, one floor is used to house the tourist office. The guys speak good English; I asked if they knew of any association that would accept my bicycle as a gift in exchange for helping me find some packing material. They put me in touch with the right person: the next morning he accompanied us to a home-family that takes in children abandoned by their families and that welcomed the unexpected gift. He then accompanied us to a large retailer of building materials, where we recovered some cardboard panels with which to build the box for transportation.

I hope that this bicycle can continue to give us moments of satisfaction and, who knows, inspire new adventures.


## At the airport in Osh

Once check-in opens, we get in line and run our packages through the metal detector. There are no pre-printed labels, just a handwritten tag with the weight and our names attached to the handles of our boxes/cases. Everything seems fine, we find seats in the waiting room.

People chatting, people reading, same scene you can find in any European airport. Except for the fifteen centimeter knife used by the person in front of us to cut apple slices for his two children! We are surprised by the absolute normality of the situation: the children are hungry, he takes out a juicy apple from his bag and one way or another he has to cut it: what better than a big kitchen knife? Actually it looks like a normal kitchen knife, but we are not really observing as he is doing a perfectly normal thing, we are the ones who are getting curious out of place. Anyway, apple cut, knife put back in bag, kids happy, back to lazing around.

Nature calls, and I need the bathroom. I walk around the waiting room, and try the various doors. I find one marked "WC", and head down the stairs. I am about to go back up the stairs to the waiting room, when a door with opaque glass on my right makes me curious. A lot of noise, a lot of people: I push it, it opens, and I find myself in the main hall of the airport, outside the security checkpoint. I try, and the door opens from the outside. I think that the weakest link in any security system is man, and that metal detectors and guards at the doors are of little use if there are passages of this type, but I tell myself that it was probably just an oversight of some employee in locking the door. I walk up the stairs, back into the waiting room, and at first light we board the plane. Goodbye Osh.


# Practical Information

## Visa

In order to travel to the Bartang Valley you need, in addition to your passport, a Tajik visa and a permit for the [Badakshan, or GBAO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gorno-Badakhshan_Autonomous_Province){:target="_blank"}.

We then contacted, a couple of months before leaving, Shagarf, of the agency [Pamir Silk Travel](http://pamirsilk.travel/en/services/paperwork/visasupport.php){:target="_blank"}, to request support in obtaining these documents.

Shagarf sent us the visa application to be completed in two copies with two passport size photos. One copy remains at the airport, the other traveled with us. We also sent a copy to Shagarf to proceed with the invitation letter, required to apply for the visa at the airport, at a cost of $25.

We also asked them to prepare the permit for the GBAO: it is theoretically obtainable in Dushanbe at a negligible cost, but to avoid the risk of bureaucratic delays we had Shagarf prepare it for $35.

Once disembarked from the airplane, first you have to fill in the immigration form: dates of arrival and departure and address of the hotel in Dushanbe.

We then did not go directly to passport control but to the consular office, a small back door in the lobby. The staff will verify that the invitation letter corresponds to what they have received locally. They then require another passport photo and $35 to issue the visa.

We then went to passport control with our visa and immigration form, which we had to keep until the end of the trip, and got our passport stamped. We then headed to baggage claim, where you need to present your baggage receipt.

Visas are not required for Italians to enter Kyrgystan; we entered via the [Kyzylart pass](https://www.google.com/maps/place/M41,+Tajikistan/@39.3839069,73.3236144,302m/data=!3m2!1e3!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x38bfd2ffe7ff8cfb:0x7e4ed60561ac24f9?hl=en){:target="_blank"} and customs checks were quick and hassle-free.

## Water

Traveling below 4000 meters above sea level, we found plenty of water on the road: springs and streams that we filtered. Even the main river when it wasn't too sandy.

In the villages you need to ask: there is always drinking water, but it is usually hidden: the one you see around is gray.

We used a Katadyn filter that only required two maintenance cycles, which is cleaning the ceramic filter with clean water. We also had purification tablets but never used them. Locals use to collect water in clear bottles, and leave them in full sun where the UV rays kill the bacteria in them.


## Hospitality

All along the Pamir Highway people are very hospitable; we received countless invitations for tea, and declined almost all of them in order to actually move. On the occasions we did indulge, tea was always served with fresh bread, fruit, yogurt, sugar, and cookies, and if it was lunchtime we also had lunch provided.

The first few days we were undecided about what to do to pay, but everyone always refused. We asked how we could make ourselves useful, but they still refused. We then realized that if they actually needed something they had no problem asking, simply. In the remote villages in Bartang, for example, they asked us for medicine. One girl's face was completely sunburned, and we had a cortisone ointment that we applied and left in small quantities; a man had pain in his leg and we left some painkiller.

The shepherds asked us for cigarettes or alcohol, comforting items for the months of isolation at high altitude. Some guys instead asked us for water as it happened that ours was fresher than what they had available at the time, but it was very rare.

Some suggested leaving money under the table, and once we did, but we almost felt wrong, as the woman who had invited us for tea had explicitly refused, even though she had provided us with a basket of apricots, a whole fresh loaf of bread and a kilo of salt, all given to us as gifts. We felt mistaken as we realized that we were doing it for us, not to accept that we were guests and constantly wanting to settle our debts and show ourselves to be self-sufficient; probably a more Western thought.

Towards the last few days we started giving away all the supplies, such as tea, salt, food but only as a gift, and they were well received. We also left postcards that we had brought from home, and it's nice to show something to exchange a few words about and leave a memory.

If we stopped in the afternoon, we were always asked if we wanted to stay the night. We refused, but mostly because we liked to camp in nature to be more independent and leave early in the morning to take advantage of the cooler hours of the day.

## Medicines

We had brought some medicines with us from Italy:

- Tachipirin ([acetaminophen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paracetamol){:target="_blank"})
- Painkiller ([diclofenac](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diclofenac){:target="_blank"})
- Polaramin for sunburn ([Dexchlorpheniramine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dexchlorpheniramine){:target="_blank"})
- Dissenten ([Loperamide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loperamide){:target="_blank"})
- Plasil ([Metoclopramide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metoclopramide){:target="_blank"})

We were also advised, upon arrival, to stock up on [Metronidazole](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metronidazole){:target="_blank"} as it is excellent for fighting a bacteria that is widespread in those areas, the [Lamblia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giardia_lamblia){:target="_blank"}; I only used it towards the end of the trip, but probably mine was a simple digestive problem rather than a more serious infection. The instructions were in Cyrillic, but we understood that the recommended use is a dose of three pills a day for two days.


## Shopping

There are many stores on the Pamir Highway from Dushanbe to Rushan; in every village children sell drinks (sweet tea or milk), fruits and vegetables. They do not have prices, you have to leave as much as seems fair.

In the Bartang Valley there is usually a "Magazin" but you have to look for both the place and the manager, as it opens only on "call". In case it is unreachable, the locals will always leave bread, rice and vegetables. In the store there is usually not much variety, but you can find everything you need.

Gasoline is kept in private houses. You have to ask, and pay high prices.

## Roads

We were equipped with mountain bikes and dirt tires, but many of the cyclists we met had simple touring bikes instead. The roads are almost completely rideable, and only for a few dozen meters we had to carry our bikes on our shoulders to wade through mudflows or debris.

The passes are very hard and the road is in very bad conditions, and the altitude above 3000mt contributes to tire even the most trained. All along the Pamir Highway in Tajikistan the road is a very bad asphalt, not maintained, that becomes a dirt road in some points; towards the Kyrgyz border it becomes a good Chinese asphalt, except in the area of the Kyzil Art pass, at 4300mt, that is muddy.

In Kyrghistan instead the roads are very good: a good asphalt maintained by the Chinese to transport goods quickly.

The fords have never presented problems: always faced barefoot, even if the waters are often cold. Be careful if the water reaches your knee, as it usually reveals a high force sufficient to tip the bike over. Steady on your feet.

## Airplane

Be careful where your flight stops: flying with a Russian airline, we had to change terminals at the Moscow-Vnukovo airport, which required a transit visa that we didn't have. Luckily, a kind policewoman escorted us to our destination, but we risked complications and possible delays.
	    
Beware of overweight fees: each company has different rules for bulky luggage, and this was the probable cause of the bicycles not arriving with us. We had paid the overweight fee, but only to Aeroflot, so Utair probably refused to ship the luggage.

Take pictures of your luggage: it can be useful to ask about lost luggage when you don't speak a common language.

## Getting around in Dushanbe

### Airport

Once you have landed you will arrive in the small arrivals hall: take an immigration form to fill out, and find a pen; it is better if you brought it from home. On your right you will find the consular office to apply for a visa, while on the left you will find the barrier with the police controls and, immediately after, the baggage claim. Be ready with your baggage receipt: it is necessary to leave the airport as the staff will check if it corresponds with the labels on your luggage.

There is a lot of chaos, and few speak English. Leaving the arrivals hall you will get to the departures, and following the perimeter on the right you will get to a desk where you can ask for more information, for example for the non-arrival of luggage. They will probably speak English, but pay attention to the opening hours: they start at 8 am, and around 1.15 pm they stop for lunch.

Outside the airport there is a lot of confusion, among relatives and cab drivers. If you are hungry there is a small bar on the left that makes great sausages, eggs, yogurt, bread and tea. If you walk a few hundred meters you get to the main street where the minibus to the city stops (number 8) or in about 40 minutes you can reach it on foot.

### Change currency

There are many currency exchange offices, all the way from the airport. All of them have the exchange rate to the dollar displayed outside. Many also offer euro exchange.

### The [Hotel Vaksh](https://goo.gl/maps/bzsAVQoAyJk){:target="_blank"}

Cheap ($36 per room), clean and in the center of town in Opera Square: you recognize it as it is a red building with a huge carpet and a person sitting outside. There are no directions, but ask the person.

No one speaks English, only somons are accepted, the staff is grumpy and the building is quite old: built in 1941 as a military hospital, it has never been renovated.

There are showers, and the water is lukewarm.

### Lunch and dinner

There are barbecues everywhere, and you can sit down for tea, bread, yogurt, or beer and goulash. [Behind the Opera](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Opera+Ballet+Square/@38.569721,68.794863,18z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x38b5d144f97367cd:0x62f3a71e70e8e04c?hl=en){:target="_blank"} there is a shady park with tables where food is served, [in front of the bazaar](https://www. google.com/maps/place/Lohuti+St,+Dushanbe,+Tajikistan/@38.566672,68.7999042,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x38b5d148b0f2cddf:0x8fc83cca6241e454?hl=en){:target="_blank"} a good place with very nice staff and good food.


### Phone

There are phone stores everywhere; we chose a Beeline pay-as-you-go but in the Bartang Valley it didn't work. We never used data, we didn't have smartphones with us, but they probably would have been available. The rates are very cheap, and the card can be recharged from vending machines on the street.

### Map

At the Serena Hotel they sell a map but it is not useful: go to the [book store](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Rudaki+Ave,+Dushanbe,+Tajikistan/@38.5838982,68.786866,584m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m2!3m1!1s0x38b5d3de06d2ab47:0x46dfb846148cadd5?hl=en){:target="_blank"} in front of the presidential palace, but beware that it is closed on Sundays. They sell a great map of the Pamir area, though unfortunately there are no contour lines.

## Distance covered, day by day

{% include google_sheet.html url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1m5k2dYgDy6y7Tm7k6wPbLfNrAgnLeVAauJcC1oFXJS8/pubhtml" %}

## Maps and GPS tracks

### 2014-08-05 - From Dushanbe to Tavildara (by jeep) and biking to Qala I Husein

{% include bikemap.html route="4164036" %}


### 2014-08-06 - From Qala I Husein to Qalai Kumb

{% include bikemap.html route="4164041" %}


### 2014-08-07 - From Qalai Kumb to Vanji

{% include bikemap.html route="4164056" %}


### 2014-08-08 - From Vanji to Yamtz

{% include bikemap.html route="4164063" %}


### 2014-08-09 - From Yamtx to Razudj

{% include bikemap.html route="4164071" %}


### 2014-08-10 - From Razudj to Yapshorv

{% include bikemap.html route="4164075" %}


### 2014-08-11 - From Yapshorv to Gudara

{% include bikemap.html route="4164076" %}


### 2014-08-12 - From Gudara to Kok-Jar

{% include bikemap.html route="4164079" %}


### 2014-08-13 - From Kok-Jar to half way to Karakul

{% include bikemap.html route="4164081" %}


### 2014-08-14 - Arrival in Karakul 

{% include bikemap.html route="4164084" %}


### 2014-08-16 - From Karakul to Sary Tash

{% include bikemap.html route="4164088" %}


### 2014-08-20/21/22 - From Sary Tash to Osh

{% include bikemap.html route="4164116" %}


## Gallery

{% include gallery.html gallery-tag="pamir" %}
